# Day 2: Models, User Registration & Authentication

We'll begin developing on the [Day 2](https://github.com/djreimer/flutter/tree/day-1) branch of [Flutter](https://github.com/djreimer/flutter). If you followed along through last class, you can continue on in your own repository.

Or, feel free to `clone` my repository and `checkout` the branch:

    $ git clone git@github.com:djreimer/flutter.git
    $ cd flutter
    $ git checkout day-2

If you already have cloned my repository, `fetch` all changes, then `checkout` the branch:

    $ cd flutter
    $ git fetch origin
    $ git checkout -t origin/day-2

## The Model Layer

Models are the "M" in "MVC". They are what we use to create, read, update, and delete data in our application. Rails ships with an object-relational mapper called Active Record. This library allows you perform complex database operations without writing SQL queries (the language that databases speak). Instead, you can express them in Ruby.

Resources:

- [Active Record Basics](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html)
- [Active record pattern](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern)
- [ActiveRecord::Base API Docs](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Base.html)

Let's create our first model. Head over to the `app/models` directory and create a `status.rb` file:

    class Status < ActiveRecord::Base
    end

## Using the Rails Console

Remember IRB from earlier? Rails offers a console, which is essentially IRB with all your application code locked and loaded.

    $ rails console

Or, for short:

    $ rails c

Then try to instantiate a new instance of `Status`. What do you see?

Rails is magical, but not THAT magical - we still have to create our table in the database. Fortunately, Rails has a built-in system for managing and performing database changes.

## Database Migrations

In the previous example we created the `status.rb` file by hand. Rails comes with a generator that will create that file for you AND create the database migration file needed to create our table. Let's delete the file we just created and let the generator do the work for us.

    $ rm app/models/status.rb
    $ rails generate model Status text:text

Let's look at the new file generated in the `db/migrate` directory:

```ruby
class CreateStatuses < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :statuses do |t|
      t.text :text

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Observations:

- A `class` that inherits from `ActiveRecord::Migration`. So, Rails knows that this is a database migration.
- A method called `change` -- Rails will execute this method when you tell it to run the migration.
- Inside `change`, there is a method call to `create_table` with the symbol `:statuses` and a block.
- Inside the block:
    - `t.text :text` will create a `TEXT` column called `text`
    - `t.timestamps` will create the default timestamp columns: `created_at` and `updated_at`
- You're probably wondering: where's the primary key?
    - Active Record automatically creates an auto-incrementing integer `id` column
- The model class is singular (`Status`) and it's table name is plural (`statuses`).

This is an example of a Rails DSL (domain-specific language). We aren't privy to what is actually going on internally, and that's okay. The `create_table` method is an example of the Builder pattern.

There are other similar methods for database modifications -- we will get to those in due time.

Now that our migration is ready to go, we need to run it.

    $ rake db:migrate

Further reading:

- [Active Record Migrations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/migrations.html)
- [ActiveRecord::Migration API Docs](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Migration.html)

## CRUD Operations

### Creating Records

Let's fire up the Rails console and create a new status.

Note: `Status` is a *class* and calling the `new` method creates a new *instance* of `Status` in Ruby. This instance is not persisted in the database until we explictly save it.

    > status = Status.new
    > status.text = "foo"
    > status.save
    #=> true

    > status = Status.create(:text => "foo")

If saving fails for any reason, the `#save` method will return false; otherwise, it returns true. Sometimes you want to raise an exception when persistance fails:

    > status.save!
    > status = Status.create!(:text => "bar")

### Reading Records

It looks like we've just created some records - yay! But how do we really know? Let's read them!

    > Status.count
    > Status.all
    > Status.where(:text => "foo")

Active Record ships with a very powerful query builder. We will continue building up our Active Record fu throughout this course.

### Updating Records

    > status = Status.first
    > status.text = "New text"
    > status.save

or

    > status.update_attributes(:text => "More new text")

### Deleting Records

    > status = Status.first
    > status.delete

or

    > status.destroy

There is a subtle but important difference between the `#delete` and `#destroy` methods. More on that later.

## Making the Case for Validations

Imagine someone signs up for Flutter and decides to post a lengthy description of Rails:

<blockquote>
Rails is a web application development framework written in the Ruby language. It is designed to make programming web applications easier by making assumptions about what every developer needs to get started. It allows you to write less code while accomplishing more than many other languages and frameworks. Experienced Rails developers also report that it makes web application development more fun.
</blockquote>

**Mini Exercise**: Jump into your console and create a new status containing this text. Can you tell me how many characters are in this passage using only your Rails console?

We need some way to restrict the length allowed for a status to 140 characters. Validations to the rescue!

## Your First Unit Test

Central to the practice of TDD (test-driven development) is the writing unit tests before actually writing the implementation. Let's write a test for our validation now.

Open up `test/models/status_test.rb` and add a test:

```ruby
should "not allow text longer than 140 characters" do
  status = Fabricate.build(:status)
  status.text = "a" * 141
  assert !status.valid?
end
```

Run our test suite and watch it fail:

    $ rake

Now, let's make it pass:

```ruby
class Status < ActiveRecord::Base
  validates :text, :length => { :maximum => 140 }
end
```

Note: The `validates` method is called a **class macro**. Fundamentally, it's just a method defined on the ActiveRecord::Base class that, when called, will register a validation rule for the model. We'll see many more class macros moving forward. There are a number of other handy built-in validators as well.

Let's see if our tests pass now.

Further reading:

- [Active Record Validations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html)

**Exercise**: Validate that the status text is at least 1 character long and write an accompanying unit test. Feel free to check out the guide above for reference.

## Passing Data To The View Layer

Now that we've manually created some statuses, let's display them in the user interface.

First, we'll write some tests around our `StatusesController#index` action:

```ruby
require 'test_helper'

class StatusesControllerTest < ActionController::TestCase
  context "GET #index" do
    setup do 
      get :index
    end

    should respond_with(200)
    should render_template("index")
    should "assign to statuses" do
      assert_not_nil assigns(:statuses)
    end
  end
end
```

We want to fetch our statuses and put them in a variable to be passed along to our template. The way to expose data to the view layer is through **instance variables** at the controller layer:

```ruby
class StatusesController < ApplicationController
  def index
    @statuses = "All the statuses!"
  end
end
```

Now, in our index view we have access to the `@statuses` variable:

```html
<%= @statuses %>
```

Are your tests passing now? 

Fire up your server and hit [http://localhost:3000/statuses](http://localhost:3000/statuses). What do you see?

Further reading:

- [Functional Testing for Your Controllers](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/testing.html#functional-tests-for-your-controllers)
- [Shoulda Matchers for Controller Testing](https://github.com/thoughtbot/shoulda-matchers#actioncontroller-matchers)
- [HTTP Status Code Reference](http://httpstatus.es/)

## Rendering Dynamic Output with ERB

In our previous example, we rendered the contents of the `@statuses` variable using `<%=  %>`. This tag outputs the return value of whatever Ruby code you put in it. The `<%  %>` tag (no equals sign) also evaluates Ruby code, but does not output the return value.

What we really want to pass in the `@statuses` variable is a collection of all statuses. Let's make the test a little more specific:

```ruby
context "GET #index" do
  setup do
    @status = Fabricate(:status)
    get :index
  end

  should respond_with(200)
  should render_template("index")
  should "assign to statuses" do
    assert_equal [@status], assigns(:statuses).to_a
  end
end
```

Then, let's make it pass.

```ruby
class StatusesController < ApplicationController
  def index
    @statuses = Status.all
  end
end
```

In the view, we need to iterate over each status and display it.

```html
<ol class="statuses">
  <% @statuses.each do |status| %>
    <li>
      <p><%= status.text %></p>
    </li>
  <% end %>
</ol>
```

Refresh the index view. What do you see?

**Exercise:** Display the date/time at which the status was created underneath the text. [Check out the Ruby Time class docs](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-2.0/Time.html#method-i-strftime) for formatting help.

Further reading:

- [Layouts and Rendering in Rails](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/layouts_and_rendering.html)
- [Strfime.net](http://strftime.net/) (a handy utility for constructing time formatting strings)

## Sorting Statuses

We need to explictly sort by creation time in reverse order to make sure the newest statuses appear at the top.

```ruby
@statuses = Status.all.order("created_at DESC")
```

## Creating Users

Up to this point, our data model has consisted of only one database table containing statuses. We need to create a table to store user data.

**Exercise:** Generate a `User` model with the following string attributes: `email`, `screen_name`, `full_name`, `url`, `password_hash`, `password_salt`. [This guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/command_line.html#rails-generate) on using the `rails generate` command may come in handy.

## Validations

**Discuss:** What validation rules need to be in place?

Before writing validations, let's make sure our user fabricator is in a valid state.

We need to use sequences in our fabricator to prevent uniqueness issues. [Explore the docs](http://www.fabricationgem.org/#!sequences) to learn how.

**Exercise:** Implement validation rules with tests. This may help: [Active Record Validations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html).

Feel free to use this regular expression for email addresses:

    /\A[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]+\z/

## Non-Column Attributes

Remember, at the end of the day our models are just plain old Ruby objects. Thus we can define our own methods that act like our "column" methods but don't actually map to a column. These are sometimes referred to as "virtual attributes" in the context of Active Record.

Such a column will come in handy for dealing with user passwords (since we want to be able to receive a "password" as input but never want to store it directly in the database):

```ruby
user = User.new
user.password = "pa$$w0rd"
user.save

user.password_hash = " ... " # some new hash
user.password_salt = " ... " # some new salt
```

The `password_hash` and `password_salt` are private. From the outside, we don't care to know how they are generated.

Let's implement a `password` attribute.

**Discuss:** What kind of validations do we need for passwords?

Introduce conditional validations.

## Active Record Callbacks

To auto-generate the hash and salt, we need to define a method that will get called before the object is saved.
Callbacks to the rescue!

[See the API docs](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Callbacks.html) for a list of all the callbacks.

In this case, we'll use the `before_save` callback.

## BCrypt

BCrypt is nice encryption library. Add to the Gemfile:

    gem 'bcrypt-ruby', '~> 3.0.0'

Then, `require 'bcrypt'` in your `User` class.

We will use two different methods provided by this library:

- `BCrypt::Engine.generate_salt` to generate salt
- `BCrypt::Engine.hash_secret(password, salt)` to cipher the password

More info on the [BCrypt algorithm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bcrypt)

## Add Password Encryption

Implement a callback that generates a salt and hashed password.

## Add Authentication Checking

Implement a class method that will check for a valid email/password combination.


