# Day 4: User Authentication & Registration

We'll begin developing on the [Day 4](https://github.com/djreimer/flutter/tree/day-4) branch of [Flutter](https://github.com/djreimer/flutter). If you followed along through last class, you can continue on in your own repository.

Or, feel free to `clone` my repository and `checkout` the branch:

    $ git clone git@github.com:djreimer/flutter.git
    $ cd flutter
    $ git checkout day-4

If you already have cloned my repository, `fetch` all changes, then `checkout` the branch:

    $ cd flutter
    $ git fetch origin
    $ git checkout -t origin/day-4

## Password Validations

Last time we implemented a `password` virtual attribute. Now we can add validation logic.

**Discuss:** What kind of validations do we need for passwords?

Introduce conditional validations.

## Active Record Callbacks

To auto-generate the hash and salt, we need to define a method that will get called before the object is saved.
Callbacks to the rescue!

[See the API docs](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Callbacks.html) for a list of all the callbacks.

In this case, we'll use the `before_save` callback.

## BCrypt

BCrypt is nice encryption library. Add to the Gemfile:

    gem 'bcrypt-ruby', '~> 3.0.0'

Then, `require 'bcrypt'` in your `User` class.

We will use two different methods provided by this library:

- `BCrypt::Engine.generate_salt` to generate salt
- `BCrypt::Engine.hash_secret(password, salt)` to cipher the password

More info on the [BCrypt algorithm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bcrypt)

## Password Encryption

Implement an `encrypt_password` callback that generates a salt and hashed password.

**Discuss:** What do we need to do in this method?

## Authentication

Implement an `authenticate` class method that will check for a valid email/password combination.

**Discuss:** What do we need to do in this method?

- What inputs does the method need to accept?
- How should we determine if the provided credentials are correct?
- What should we return in each case?

Let's write unit tests, then implement the feature.

## Registration

**Discuss:** What do we need to add to our app to display a registration page? What "resources" are involved?

Let's use some built-in Rails generators to help us.

### Form Helpers

Explore the markup generated by the Rails form helpers and how to bind model data to a form.

Resources:

- [Form Helpers Guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/form_helpers.html)
- [form_for docs](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/FormHelper.html#method-i-form_for)

### Routing

Run `rake routes` to see where the form POST will get routed.

### Filtering User Input

Discuss the [strong_parameters](https://github.com/rails/strong_parameters) library and mass assignment vulnerabilites.

**Discuss:** What are the possible scenarios when a user hits the create action? Diagram them, then write some tests.

### Redirection versus Rendering

Discuss the difference between `redirect_to` and `render`. 

### Displaying Errors in the Interface

What if the user submits invalid input? We need to display the errors back to the user.

**Exercise:** Recall that validation errors are accessible via the `errors` method. That errors object has a `full_messages` method that returns an `Array` of error message strings. The errors object also has an `any?` method that returns true or false, depending on whether there are any errors.

With this knowledge, list all the current errors at top of the registration form page. If there are no errors, then skip rendering the list. Please use an unordered list.