# Day 7: Forms & Partials

We'll begin developing on the [Day 7](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise/tree/day-7) branch of [Basewise](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise). If you followed along through last class, you can continue on in your own repository.

Or, feel free to `clone` my repository and `checkout` the branch:

    $ git clone git@github.com:dphaener/basewise.git
    $ cd basewise
    $ git checkout day-7

If you already have cloned my repository, `fetch` all changes, then `checkout` the branch:

    $ cd basewise
    $ git fetch origin
    $ git checkout -t origin/day-7

## Wire Up Login and Registration Links

Only show login/sign up if the user is not logged in; otherwise, display a log out link.

## Logging Out

**Discuss:** How should we implement this?

- Which controller?
- Which action?
- Which verb (GET, POST, PUT/PATCH, DELETE)?

Introduce singular resources.

**Exercise:** Convert sessions into a singular resource. Make sure all tests pass. Do your best to interpret test errors and fix them.

Resources:

- [Rails Routing Guide / Singular Resources](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#singular-resources)

## User Settings Form

**Discuss:** How should we implement this?

- Which controller?
- Which action?
- Which verb (GET, POST, PUT/PATCH, DELETE)?

**Exercise:** Finish out the settings form. Hint: you can pass a hash of data to the `update_attributes` method on model objects to update fields.

## Reducing Duplication with Partials

Let's extract the error messages markup into a partial.

## Restricting Access

**Discuss:** Suppose someone tries to go to a restricted area (like the user settings page) and is not logged in. What should we do?

Introduce `before_action` hooks and define an `authenticate_user!` method.
