# Day 8: Associations

We'll begin developing on the [Day 8](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise/tree/day-8) branch of [Basewise](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise). If you followed along through last class, you can continue on in your own repository.

Or, feel free to `clone` my repository and `checkout` the branch:

    $ git clone https://github.com/dphaener/basewise.git
    $ cd basewise
    $ git checkout day-8

If you already have cloned my repository, `fetch` all changes, then `checkout` the branch:

    $ cd basewise
    $ git fetch origin
    $ git checkout -t origin/day-8

## User Settings Form

**Discuss:** How should we implement this?

- Which controller?
- Which action?
- Which verb (GET, POST, PUT/PATCH, DELETE)?

**Exercise:** Finish out the settings form. Hint: you can pass a hash of data to the `update_attributes` method on model objects to update fields.

## Reducing Duplication with Partials

Let's look at how the top navigation is in a partial. Can we do this anywhere else?

## Restricting Access

**Discuss:** Suppose someone tries to go to a restricted area (like the user settings page) and is not logged in. What should we do?

Introduce `before_action` hooks and define an `authenticate_user!` method.


## Associating Projects with Users

We need to setup a one-to-many relationship between users and projects. Let's generate a Rails migration for this and then wire up the ActiveRecord associations.

At this point, it's probably best to nuke our development database: `rake db:reset`.

Resources:

- [Active Record Associations](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/association_basics.html)
