# Day 10: Nested Resources & Todos

We'll begin developing on the [Day 10](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise/tree/day-10) branch of [Basewise](https://github.com/dphaener/basewise). If you followed along through last class, you can continue on in your own repository.

Or, feel free to `clone` my repository and `checkout` the branch:

    $ git clone https://github.com/dphaener/basewise.git
    $ cd basewise
    $ git checkout day-10

If you already have cloned my repository, `fetch` all changes, then `checkout` the branch:

    $ cd basewise
    $ git fetch origin
    $ git checkout -t origin/day-10

## Catch Up

First create a new file under `app/assets/javascripts/components` called `todo_list_data.js.coffee`
and paste this code into it:

```coffeescript
  $ ->
    TodoListData = flight.component(
      ->
        @create = (ev, data) ->
          jqxhr = $.ajax
            method: "POST"
            contentType: "application/json; charset=utf-8"
            dataType: "json"
            url: "todo_lists"
            data: JSON.stringify(todo_list: data)

          jqxhr.done (data) =>
            if data.success
              @trigger("dataTodoListCreated", data)
            else
              @trigger("dataTodoListCreationFailed", data)

          jqxhr.fail (xhr) =>
            @trigger("dataTodoListCreationFailed")

        @after "initialize", ->
          @on document, "uiTodoListCreationRequested", @create
    )

    TodoListData.attachTo(document)
```

**Discuss:** What does this file do?

## Nested resources

**Discuss:** What is a nested resource?

    resources :projects do
      resources :todo_lists
    end

**Discuss:** Why should we be using nested resources?

For further information check out the [guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/routing.html#nested-resources) to nested resources in the Rails docs.

## Creating New Todo Lists

**Discuss:** How is the async loading handled

Pair code to finish the to do lists interface

## Todos

**Discuss:** How should we implement this?

- Model
  What attributes do we need?
  What associations do we need?
- Routes
  What routes do we need to implement
- Which controller?
- Which action?
- Which verb (GET, POST, PUT/PATCH, DELETE)?
- Views
  How should we display the todo lists?

**Exercise:** Use a rails generator to generate the model and create the proper
associations.

## Todos Tests

**Discuss:** What types of validations do we need on this model?

**Exercise:** Write unit tests for the validations

## Creating New Todos

**Discuss:** How should we implement this? What UI and UX concerns do we have?

Pair code to create the create to do lists interface
